NEXT-12685 - Add field inheritance (#136)
shopware/docs: guides/plugins/plugins/framework/data-handling/field-inheritance.md

# Field inheritance

## Overview

In this guide you'll learn how to create inherited fields for your entities.

## Prerequisites

This guide is built upon the [Plugin Base Guide](../../plugin-base-guide.md), but any plugin will work here. Just note that all examples are using the plugin mentioned above.

You also should have a look at our [Adding custom complex data](./add-custom-complex-data.md) guide, since this guide is built upon it.

> 

Reviewer: I'm missing an Intro inheritance at all.
Is there another guide, I did not find ? 
You explain, how to, but not what field inheritance is.

## Inherit a field

To start using inheritance, we have to update our definition and database.

1. Make inheritable fields nullable in the database
2. Add the `ParentFkField`, `ParentAssociationField`, `ChildrenAssociationField` in your definition
3. Enable inheritance by overwriting `isInheritanceAware()`
4. Flag fields as inheritable
5. Add getters and setters to the entity class

> ### 1. Make fields nullable

Reviewer 2: Sorry - I had a look at it again and feel like we should remove those numbers.

> The first thing we need to do is to make all our fields that we want to make inheritable nullable in our migration.

Reviewer 2: Link to migrations

```sql
ALTER TABLE `swag_example` MODIFY `description` VARCHAR(255) NULL;
```

### 2. Add the ParentFkField and the associations

After we've made all our fields nullable, we still need to add the following fields to our definition:
`Shopware\Core\Framework\DataAbstractionLayer\Field\ParentFkField`, `Shopware\Core\Framework\DataAbstractionLayer\Field\ParentAssociationField` 

> and `Shopware\Core\Framework\DataAbstractionLayer\Field\ChildrenAssociationField`.

Reviewer: Please just do not explain what to do here. Try to explain, what these Fields do:

ParentFkField is the foreign key, that references the parent's id. In default, it points to a `parent_id` column in the database.

Please do this for the ParentAssociationField and ChildrenAssociationField aswell

Reviewer 2: Agree. Should definitely explain what the fields do

All these fields must refer to our definition by using `self::class`. The `ParentAssociationField` has as its second parameter the referenceField, which in our case is `id`.
Below you can find an example of how it should then look.

{% code title="<plugin root>/src/Core/Content/Example/ExampleDefinition.php" %}
```php
protected function defineFields(): FieldCollection
{
    return new FieldCollection([
        ...
        
        new ParentFkField(self::class),
        new ParentAssociationField(self::class, 'id'),
        new ChildrenAssociationField(self::class),
        
        ...
    ]);
}
```
{% endcode %}

> ### 4. Allow inheritance

Reviewer 2: This used to be "3." earlier, "3" is also missing

Now we need to enable inheritance by overriding the `isInheritanceAware` method in our definition, which must then return `true`.

{% code title="<plugin root>/src/Core/Content/Example/ExampleDefinition.php" %}
```php
public function isInheritanceAware(): bool
{
    return true;
}
```
{% endcode %}

### 5. Flag fields as inheritable

> After we've enabled inheritance for our definition, we need to do is to add the`Shopware\Core\Framework\DataAbstractionLayer\Field\Flag\Inherited` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After we've enabled inheritance for our definition, we need to add the`Shopware\Core\Framework\DataAbstractionLayer\Field\Flag\Inherited` 
```

{% code title="<plugin root>/src/Core/Content/Example/ExampleEntity.php" %}
```php
<?php declare(strict_types=1);

namespace Swag\BasicExample\Core\Content\Example;

use Shopware\Core\Framework\DataAbstractionLayer\Entity;
use Shopware\Core\Framework\DataAbstractionLayer\EntityIdTrait;

class ExampleEntity extends Entity
{
    ...

    /**
     * @var self|null
     */
    protected $parent;

    /**
     * @var string|null
     */
    protected $parentId;

    /**
     * @var ExampleCollection|null
     */
    protected $children;

    ...

    public function getParent(): ?ExampleEntity
    {
        return $this->parent;
    }

    public function setParent(ExampleEntity $parent): void
    {
        $this->parent = $parent;
    }

    public function getParentId(): ?string
    {
        return $this->parentId;
    }

    public function setParentId(?string $parentId): void
    {
        $this->parentId = $parentId;
    }

    public function getChildren(): ?ExampleCollection
    {
        return $this->children;
    }

    public function setChildren(ExampleCollection $children): void
    {
        $this->children = $children;
    }
}
```
{% endcode %}

## Translations

> This concept also supports translations. Given a parent/child entity with an
> inherited language (de-CH *inherits from* de-DE), the resolution of the
> values will be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This concept also supports translations. Given a parent/child entity with an
inherited language (de-CH *inherits from* de-DE), the inheritance system will try to look up the
values in following order:
```

1. Child (de-CH)
2. Child (de-DE)
3. Parent (de-CH)
4. Parent (de-DE)

If an inheritance is not found, the next translation in the chain above will be used.

### Enable translation inheritance

Assuming our definition is already aware of inheritance, we have to update 
our definition and add the `Inherited` flag to our translated fields and
the translation association.

```php
(new TranslatedField('name'))->addFlags(new Inherited()),
(new TranslationsAssociationField(ExampleTranslationDefinition::class))->addFlags(new Inherited()),
```

> ## Add inheritance via plugin

Reviewer: Aren't all changes here made via plugin ?!

2. you have to add the appropriate association via your EntityExtension class.
3. the new association requires the `Inherited` flag
4. you need to add a column in the MySQL table of the entity that has the following properties:
    * binary(16)
    * nullable
    * default null

To avoid creating the column incorrectly, you can simply use the `Shopware\Core\Framework\Migration\InheritanceUpdaterTrait` in your migrations:

{% code title="<plugin root>/src/Migration/Migration1615363012AddInheritanceColumnToExample.php" %}
```php
<?php declare(strict_types=1);

namespace Swag\BasicExample\Migration;

use Doctrine\DBAL\Connection;
use Shopware\Core\Framework\Migration\InheritanceUpdaterTrait;
use Shopware\Core\Framework\Migration\MigrationStep;

class Migration1615363012AddInheritanceColumnToExample extends MigrationStep
{
    use InheritanceUpdaterTrait;

    public function getCreationTimestamp(): int
    {
        return 1615363012;
    }

    public function update(Connection $connection): void
    {
        $this->updateInheritance($connection, 'swag_example', 'example_field');
    }

    public function updateDestructive(Connection $connection): void
    {
    }
}
```

> {% endcode %}

Reviewer: Why are migrations at the end of the document ? 
Why is not in the bullet list on the top of the file ?

> {% endcode %}

Reviewer: Aren't there any related guides (next steps) ?

Reviewer 2: While I generally agree in this case, we do not want to have next steps in each and every guide.

But it would fit in this one, yes.
